
               THE
        GHOST OF CHATHAM;
            A VISION.

  DEDICATED TO THE HOUSE OF PEERS.


    "Now a thing was secretly brought to me, and mine ear
    received a little thereof. A SPIRIT passed before my
    face."
        Job.


LONDON:
PRINTED FOR WILLIAM HONE,
45, LUDGATE HILL.

1821.

_Sixpence._




J. M'Creery, Tooks Court,
Chancery Lane, London.




PREFACE.


The following lines were written under the powerful impulse of
feelings which appear to have been almost consentaneous with those of
the whole British people. The national spirit has been rouzed against
this cruel and unconstitutional attack upon the QUEEN, with pervasive
ardour, which forcibly recalls the language of the Augustan poet:--

    "SPIRITUS intus alit, _totamque infusa per ARTUS_,
    MENS agitat MOLEM, et _magno se corpore miscet_."

This irresistible movement has been one of LOYALTY, not of FACTION; of
love and not of enmity towards the constitution. It is not disputed
that factious men exist, who are ready to swell public tumult whenever
it arises: but it is mere drivelling, for ministers and their
adherents, to talk of "_radicalism_" and _democracy_ on this occasion.
They must know, if they consult the commonest sources of intelligence
open to them, that detestation of "THE BILL OF PAINS AND PENALTIES" is
rooted beyond all possibility of eradication in the breasts of an
overwhelming majority of good men, and faithful subjects.

At the moment when it was determined to send the following "VISION" to
the press, a burst of honest exultation has electrified the whole
kingdom. With feelings of solemn gratitude to God, and love for my
country, I rejoice not only that the QUEEN is thus delivered from the
fangs of her enemies; but that THE KING, THE CONSTITUTION, and THE
COUNTRY, have been thus, as I do unequivocally believe, rescued from a
tremendous explosion, which would at best have been of doubtful issue
to our liberties.

Notwithstanding this most happy, this _providential_ result, I have
determined still to send out the poem to the public; because it
expresses in strong, however inadequate language, sentiments which are
essential to our character as a free people, and to the preservation
of our justly balanced monarchy.

I have not assumed the FASCIS of satire, without deep conviction that
its rods were imperatively called into action: but most gladly shall I
reverse them, after the manner of the ancient LICTORS, over the
obsequies of an administration, which must be now in its death-pangs.
May succeeding cabinets be WARNED, _not guided_, by its example!




THE GHOST OF CHATHAM;

_A VISION._


      A vision came! It was not in the hour
    Of sleep; but when the unresisted power
    Of magic Fancy, threw, with full control,
    Her half prophetic mantle o'er the soul.
    The place was thron'd like Britain's royal halls,
    And her proud navy deck'd the tap'stried walls.
    Statesmen and heroes grac'd the pictur'd scene;
    Fathers who were what since their sons have been;
    And some whose laurell'd brows might glow with shame,
    Of sons with nought of their's besides the name.
    In this august abode the loud debate
    Seem'd hush'd, and prince and peer in silence sate;
    E'en G--ff--d's brazen descant seem'd to fail,
    And gasping C--pley gazed on L--d--rd--le;
    Panting, they loll'd their contumelious tongues,
    And suck'd _Italian juice_ to clear their lungs.
    Y--k mus'd on _armies_; yet, with doubtful trust,
    Wish'd he were certain, or the cause were just:
    The eye of Cl--r--nce fiercely rang'd the floor,
    But soften'd as it fell on D--n--ghm--re;
    While L--v--rp--l, who inly seem'd to fear
    For place and power, his fellows strove to cheer
    With sickly smile; and courtier lords obscene,
    Temper'd new filth, to daub their libell'd QUEEN.

      Sudden amid the peers whom ENGLAND hails
    HER nobles--men who fail but when SHE fails,
    The vision rose. It was a rev'rend form
    Of aged dignity: its eye was warm
    With kindlings of a spirit that of old
    Made those walls tremble through its earthly mould.
    Now a mild glory round its presence play'd,
    And 'spoke from heav'nly courts the awful shade.
    Its brow wore high reproof; the lifted arm
    Was stretch'd for pleading; and there was a charm
    Of coming eloquence, as firm it stood,
    Like one whose rank was with the great and good;
    And well that rank was own'd, when ERSKINE cried,
    "'Tis England's CHATHAM!"--"CHATHAM!" all replied.

      Like the dead stillness of the summer air,
    When pregnant clouds of shrouded fire are there,
    They sat:--and like the voice of thunder broke
    The rolling periods, as the vision spoke.
    "Is this," he cried, "the consecrated floor,
    Where England's peerage stood, as known of yore,
    Jealous of honour, zealous for the laws;
    Justice their sword, and England's weal their cause?
    Are these the walls whose echoes then return'd
    No words that chasten'd gallantry had spurn'd?
    Is this the throne whose last loved tenant view'd
    His people's morals as the monarch's good?
    Display'd beneath the sov'reign diadem,
    DOMESTIC VIRTUE, Britain's dearest gem;
    And bade _Example_ to _his_ court proclaim
    What taught, unpractis'd, is the teacher's shame?
    Ah no! that throne is chang'd; this gew-gaw thing
    Befits a raree-shew, not England's King!
    And can it be that Brunswick's cherish'd heir
    Will also change the laws which plac'd him there?
    Forget the STUART'S FATE, the BRUNSWICK'S OATH;
    Yet make his sorrowing subjects dwell on both?
    Forbid it, Heaven! Far other thoughts he knew,
    When yet his talents with his graces grew;
    When Genius, Beauty, in his circle ran,
    Admired the prince, and half adored the man.
    Nor now _thus_ fall'n!--Yet whence this hot cabal
    Of treasury bench, and bench episcopal?
    These monstrous portents that before me rise
    Of mitred pimps, and coronetted spies!
    This deep, dark plotting, spreading net and snare,
    By hands that used their country's ark to bear?
    This hateful truckling to misguided power,
    Combined in palace, temple, hall, and bower,
    To crush an outcast Queen, with evidence
    By facts refuted, ridiculed by sense?--
    Tales that would merit but an equal fate,
    Told of the veriest wench in Billingsgate!
    FATHERS! and BRITONS! whence this alien band
    Of miscreant lechers bribed from sea and land?--
    By England spurn'd, yet plied with England's gold,
    Till every scoundrel's stock of oaths was sold;
    Then hither sent by hirelings vile as they,
    To pass for sterling truth in open day.
    Monstrous fatuity! and British peers
    Have lent these vermin not unwilling ears;
    For new-born lies have barter'd ancient law,
    Broke public faith, to patch a private flaw,
    And made a court that freemen never saw.
    ACCUSERS, JURY, JUDGES, _all in ONE_!
    O England! now be firm, or be undone!
    Strangle this monster, ere its birth be o'er,
    Or grov'lling lick the dust to rise no more!
    Heard I aright? and was it HERE I heard
    This crew 'gainst England's CONSORT QUEEN preferred?
    Here did their sland'rous breath infest the air?
    Hence did malicious tongues the scandal bear?
    Gush'd 'neath this sacred dome the prurient flood
    Of filth and venom, from that viper brood,
    Which o'er the land hath spread its noisome stain,
    While shudd'ring virtue weeps, but weeps in vain?
    And (O shame's nauseous dregs!) did noble lips
    Here taste that stream with epicurean sips?
    And mitred heads, as o'er its scum they bent,
    Snuff the rank steam, and chuckle at the scent?--
    My soul is sick!--I turn with sated ear,
    And find a cordial in my brethren here.
    Peers who their conscience to no market bring;
    Respect themselves, their country, and their king:
    Nor would round England's smiling hearths diffuse
    The breath--the very atmosphere of stews.
    O horrid! yes, I feel the blast impure,
    Air no blessed spirit may unpained endure:
    Yet leave I not without a warning voice:
    Hear, and obey, and Britons shall rejoice!

      "You cannot, Lords! by votes create a crime,
    Nor make your country's voice with falsehood chime:--
    You cannot quench, with all this flood of LIES,
    A gallant people's glowing sympathies:--
    You cannot hide your idol God from them,
    When prone you kiss its garment's nether hem:--
    You cannot waste their treasure on a cause,
    That boldly violates their guardian laws;
    And 'scape the arrows from their quiver hurl'd--
    The keen reproach, and hisses of the world.
    You may cry 'GUILTY!' but the umpire land
    Cancels the verdict with indignant hand,
    Reveres the NOBLE MANY who uphold
    The nation's dignity; nor brooks that gold,
    Wrung hardly from her toiling sons, should pay
    The Judas gang that would her rights betray.
    Scorn meets THE FEW who, bought by pandering power,
    Outvote the nation's voice in hapless hour.
    O pause ere yet that fatal hour is seen!--
    Be counsell'd, Lords!--You cannot crush your Queen,
    But by a blow that must, with blind intent,
    Bruise THRONE and ALTAR in its dire descent!

      "O where, ye PRELATES! is your light withdrawn?
    Where now the lustral influence of your lawn?[A]
    Where the meek crosier, and the crook of fleece,
    That guard the fold (not reckless of the peace)?
    Is there no wolf in all your pastur'd plains?
    No murrain rankling in your lambkins' veins?
    No lurking thief, by whom they nightly bleed?
    No arid spots refreshing streams that need?
    O why, forgetful of your solemn call,
    Sit ye, unmindful where the victims fall,
    To _hire_ ONE SACRIFICE with cords be bound,
    And your anointed hands inflict the wound?
    O desecrated thus, by off'rings high
    To demon passions!--Foul idolatry!
    If such your rites, no LEVITE here I view,
    But BAAL'S PRIESTS may leap and shout with you.[B]
    O whither urge these bodings of my breast?
    Let hope, let charity their flight arrest!
    In Britain's SARDIS, surely some remain
    Whose courtly robes yet bear no wilful stain!
    PRINCES! and PEERS! once more on you I call--
    Save! save your tottering glory ere it fall!
    If truth, if virtue, to your hearts be dear;
    If sounds of sweet content you love to hear;
    If generous sons, and daughters chaste, you prize,
    And all a happy home's delightful ties;
    If just gradation on the social scale
    Be worth your care; if rank can aught avail:
    If rev'rence for the altar and the throne,
    Be yours, and GEORGE the lawful king, you own:
    If rights your fathers were combin'd to save,
    When Britain's sceptre to his race they gave,
    Be justly claim'd, as justly claim'd they are
    By every son that British mothers bear:
    O save your names from hate, disgrace, and scorn,
    HIST'RY'S bequest to ages yet unborn!

      "Ah! heard ye not your lion-genius roar,
    And shake with mighty tread his ev'ry shore?
    Deem not that roar in vain; for it hath found
    Redoubl'd echoes all the realm around,
    And generous hearts have rous'd them at the sound.
    There is a spirit mightier far than yours--
    Magnanimous and mild, it much endures:
    But urg'd too far, a giant's strength awakes,
    And gyves and bonds at one fierce effort breaks.
    O hear yet more! There is a GOD, whose eye
    Pierces your counsels' darkest mystery;
    Whose blessing England owns for countless years,
    Whose vengeance now she deprecates with tears.
    To HIM your Queen appeals, and at HIS bar,
    Your names must mark the awful calendar;
    There must the witness CONSCIENCE naked plead,
    And guilty kings receive the culprit's meed.
    O think on this! e'en now that witness own,
    And save YOURSELVES, your COUNTRY, and your THRONE!"--

      The vision ceas'd, and in a radiant cloud
    Withdrew--The breathless senate rev'rent bow'd.
    New vigour throbb'd in every patriot breast,
    And nerveless horror sicken'd all the rest.

        THE END.


FOOTNOTES:

[A] See the Earl of Chatham's animated speech against the employment
of Indian warriors to assist in the subjugation of America.

[B] In this, as I conceive, seasonable reproof of certain "_Lords
Spiritual_" I would not be understood to involve the whole of that
reverend body. Some of them, I firmly believe, have remained at a
distance from the combat, aged and infirm, like ELI, sitting by the
wayside of Shiloh, and watching with trembling heart, lest the ark (I
will not say of GOD, but of THE CONSTITUTION) should fall in the
unhallowed conflict. Others, perhaps, have not cared to meddle in what
they may have considered a doubtful matter: but it must not be
concealed, that when TRUTH and JUSTICE are at stake, _neutrality_ is
no honourable sanctuary for the avowed servants of the TEMPLE. Let the
Bishops beware of discovering their nakedness upon the very steps of
the altar.--The eye of an enlightened people is upon them; and _with
their character for real consistent PIETY, and fidelity to sound
PROTESTANT PRINCIPLES, THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND will stand or fall_.




J. M'Creery, Tooks Court,
Chancery Lane, London.




JUST PUBLISHED BY WILLIAM HONE, 45, LUDGATE-HILL.


_Price Two Shillings._

THE PREROGATIVES OF A QUEEN CONSORT OF ENGLAND; particularly of her
ability to make and receive Gifts, to sue and be sued, and to hold
Courts without the King; of its being Treason to plot against her
Life; of the modes of trying her for Offences; and of her ancient
Revenue of Queen-Gold.

    "The King's wife is participant of many Prerogatives
    above other Women."--_Finch._

       *       *       *       *       *

Handsomely engraved, in one Print, from authentic Likenesses obtained
by WILLIAM HONE from Spain, for the gratification of the British
People.

_Price 1s.--Fine Proofs on India paper, 3s._

THE PORTRAITS OF QUIROGA, RIEGO, AGUERO, AND BANOS, the Four
distinguished FOUNDERS OF THE SPANISH REVOLUTION; which, on the 1st of
January, 1820, they courageously commenced in Arms; and, to their
immortal glory, secured, without bloodshed, by putting the law above
the King.

       *       *       *       *       *

BUONAPARTEPHOBIA.--_Ninth Edition--Now first printed as an 8vo.
pamphlet._

_Price One Shilling.--A Coloured Edition, 1s. 6d._

THE ORIGIN OF DR. SLOP'S NAME. BY THE AUTHOR OF THE POLITICAL HOUSE
THAT JACK BUILT.

    "I have conferred on him a glorious immortality.
    --With his name the mothers still their babes."--
        _King Henry VI._

"By virtue of my public authority, I hereby ratify and confirm his
right and title to the name of "SLOP;" and it is my parodial will and
pleasure, that he continue to _bear_ it during his natural
life."--PREFACE.

       *       *       *       *       *

_NEW EDITIONS--carefully printed, with fine Impressions of the Cuts._


_One Shilling each._

1. THE POLITICAL HOUSE THAT JACK BUILT--Thirteen Cuts.

2. THE MAN IN THE MOON, with the Political Christmas Carol, and the
Parody written by Mr. Canning--Fifteen Cuts.

3. THE QUEEN'S MATRIMONIAL LADDER. With Fourteen Step Scenes and
Eighteen Cuts.


_Sixpence each._

1. NON MI RICORDO, &c. &c. &c.! Cuts.

2. THE DROPT CLAUSES OUT OF THE BILL AGAINST THE QUEEN. For the
Attorney General to peruse and settle.

N. B.--_Coloured Editions_ of the "Political House that Jack Built,"
and the "Queen's Matrimonial Ladder," price _3s._ each. "The Man in
the Moon," _coloured_, _2s._ "Non mi Ricordo!" _coloured_, _1s._

       *       *       *       *       *

_New Works Preparing--One Shilling each._

1. THE RIGHT DIVINE OF KINGS TO GOVERN WRONG.

2. THE TRIUMPH OF THE PRESS.

3. A SLAP AT SLOP.

4. NERO VINDICATED.




JUST PUBLISHED BY WILLIAM HONE, 45, LUDGATE-HILL.


_Price Six Shillings in Boards._

THE APOCRYPHAL NEW TESTAMENT, Being all the Gospels, Epistles, and
other pieces now extant, attributed in the first four centuries to
JESUS CHRIST, his Apostles, and their companions, and not included in
the New Testament by its compilers. Translated from the original, and
now first collected into One Volume, with a Preface and Tables.

*.* _The Books that exist, of those not included in the Canon, are
carefully brought together into the present volume. They naturally
assume the title of the APOCRYPHAL NEW TESTAMENT; and he who possesses
this and the New Testament, has, in the two volumes, a collection of
all the Historical Records relative to Christ and his Apostles, now in
existence, and considered sacred by Christians during the first four
centuries after his birth._

    CONTENTS.

    _Preface._

    _Gospel of the birth of Mary._

    _The Protevangelion, or birth of Christ and the Virgin,
    by James the lesser._

    _The first Gospel of the Infancy of Christ._

    _Thomas's Gospel of the Infancy._

    _Epistles of Christ and Abgarus._

    _Gospel of Nicodemus._

    _Apostles' Creed._

    _Paul's Epistle to the Laodiceans._

    _Epistles of Paul and Seneca._

    _Acts of Paul and Thecla._

    _Clement's Two Epistles to the Corinthians._

    _Epistle of Barnabas._

    _The Seven Epistles of Ignatius to the Ephesians,
    Magnesians, Trallians, Romans, Philadelphians,
    Smyrnæans, and Polycarp._

    _Epistle of Polycarp to the Philippians._

    _The Shepherd of Hermas, in three books._

    Table I. List of all the lost Apocryphal books.

    Table II. List of early Catalogues of the Books of the
    New Testament.

*.* By the publication of this Volume, the Editor conceives he has
rendered an acceptable service to the THEOLOGICAL STUDENT and the
ECCLESIASTICAL ANTIQUARY:--he has endeavoured to render it more
gratifying to the reader, and more convenient for reference, by
arranging the Books into Chapters, and dividing the Chapters into
verses.

The LOVER OF OLD LITERATURE will here find the obscure but
unquestionable origin of several remarkable relations, in the Golden
Legend, the Lives of the Saints, and similar productions, concerning
the Parentage and Birth of the Virgin, her Marriage with Joseph on the
budding of his rod, the Nativity of Jesus, the Miracles of his
Infancy, his laboring with Joseph at the Carpentry trade, the actions
of his Followers, his Descent into Hell, &c.

Several of the PAPAL PAGEANTS for the Populace and the MONKISH
MYSTERIES performed as _Dramas_ at Chester, Coventry, Newcastle, and
in other parts of England, are almost verbatim representations of the
stories. Many valuable _Pictures_ by the best masters--_Prints_ by the
early Engravers, and particularly of the Italian and German
Schools--_Woodcuts_ in early black letter and block books--and
_Illuminations_ of missals and monastic MSS.--receive immediate
elucidation on reference to the APOCRYPHAL NEW TESTAMENT, and are
without explanation from any other source.




Transcriber's Note

This text contains some variant and archaic spelling; this has been
left as printed throughout.

A single typographic error, on page iii, was corrected--recals amended
to recalls.

The inverse asterisms used in the adverts at the end of the text are
shown as *.* in this e-text.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Ghost of Chatham; A Vision, by Anonymous

